- Every blockchain consists of a cluster of nodes functioning on a peer-to-peer (P2P) network system. Every node in a network has a copy of the shared ledger which gets updated timely. Each node can verify transactions, initiate or receive transactions and create blocks.
- There are primarily two types of blockchains; Private and Public blockchain. However, there are several variations too, like Consortium and Hybrid blockchains.
##### Public Blockchain
- A public blockchain is a non-restrictive, permission-less distributed ledger system. Anyone who has <i>access to the internet can sign in on a blockchain platform to become an authorized node and be a part of the blockchain network. A node or user which is a part of the public blockchain is authorized to access current and past records, verify transactions or do proof-of-work for an incoming block, and do mining. The most basic use of public blockchains is for mining and exchanging cryptocurrencies.</i> Thus, the most common public blockchains are <b>Bitcoin and Litecoin blockchains.</b> <b>Example:</b> Bitcoin, Ethereum, Litecoin
##### Private Blockchain
- A private blockchain is a restrictive or permission blockchain operative only in a closed network. Private blockchains are usually used within an organization or enterprises where only selected members are participants of a blockchain network. The level of security, authorizations, permissions, accessibility is in the hands of the controlling organization. Thus, private blockchains are similar in use as a public blockchain but have a small and restrictive network. Private blockchain networks are <i>deployed for voting, supply chain management, digital identity, asset ownership, etc.</i> <b>Examples</b> of private blockchains are; Multichain and Hyperledger projects (Fabric, Sawtooth), Corda, etc.
##### Consortium Blockchain
- A consortium blockchain is a semi-decentralized type where more than one organization manages a blockchain network. This is contrary to what we saw in a private blockchain, which is managed by only a single organization. More than one organization can act as a node in this type of blockchain and exchange information or do mining. Consortium blockchains are typically used by <i>banks, government organizations, etc.</i> <b>Examples</b> of consortium blockchain are; Energy Web Foundation, R3, etc.
##### Hybrid Blockchain
- A hybrid blockchain is a combination of the private and public blockchain. It uses the features of both types of blockchains that is one can have a private permission-based system as well as a public permission-less system. With such a hybrid network, users can control who gets access to which data stored in the blockchain. The hybrid system of blockchain is flexible so that users can easily join a private blockchain with multiple public blockchains. A transaction in a private network of a hybrid blockchain is usually verified within that network. But users can also release it in the public blockchain to get verified. The public blockchains increase the hashing and involve more nodes for verification. This enhances the security and transparency of the blockchain network. <b>Example</b> of a hybrid blockchain is Dragonchain.
##### Advantages of Private Blockchain
- <b>Speed</b> – Private blockchains’ transactions occur at greater speed as compared to public blockchains. That means the transactions per second (TPS) rate is higher in the case of private blockchains.
- <b>Scalability</b> – Private blockchains are pretty scalable. That is, you can choose the size of your private blockchain as per your needs. For instance, if there is an organization that needs a blockchain of only 20 nodes, they can easily deploy one. 



